Michael Henchard, fictional character, a well-to-do grain merchant with a guilty secret in his past who is the protagonist of the novel The Mayor of Casterbridge (1886) by Thomas Hardy.
The novel tells of the rise and fall of Michael Henchard, who, starting from nothing after abandoning his wife and daughter, gains prosperity and respect and is reunited with his family only to lose everything through his own wrong-headedness, his vengeful nature, and a spate of bad luck.
At the end of The Mayor of Casterbridge, the ruined Michael Henchard wills that no one remember his name after his death. This request is profoundly startling and tragic, especially when one considers how important Henchard’s name has been to him during his lifetime. After committing the abominable deed of selling his wife and child, Henchard wakes from a drunken stupor and wonders, first and foremost, if he told any of the fair-goers his name. Eighteen years pass between that scene on the heath of Weydon-Priors and Henchard’s reunion with Susan in Casterbridge, but we immediately realize the value that Henchard places on a good name and reputation. Not only has he climbed from hay-trusser to mayor of a small agricultural town, but he labors to protect the esteem this higher position affords him. When Susan and Elizabeth-Jane come upon the mayor hosting a banquet for the town’s most prominent citizens, they witness a man struggling to convince the masses that, despite a mismanaged harvest, he is an honest person with a worthy name.

As he stares out at an unhappy audience made up of grain merchants who have lost money and common citizens who, without wheat, are going hungry, Henchard laments that he cannot undo the past. He relates grown wheat metaphorically to the mistakes of the past—neither can be taken back. Although Henchard learns this lesson at the end of Chapter IV, he fails to internalize it. If there is, indeed, a key to his undoing, it is his inability to let go of his past mistakes. Guilt acts like a fuel that keeps Henchard moving toward his own demise. Unable to forget the events that took place in the furmity-woman’s tent, he sets out to punish himself again and again. While he might have found happiness by marrying Lucetta, for instance, Henchard determines to make amends for the past by remarrying a woman he never loved in the first place. Possessed of a “restless and self-accusing soul,” Henchard seems to seek out situations that promise further debasement. Although Donald Farfrae eventually appropriates Henchard’s job, business, and even his loved ones, it is Henchard who insists on creating the competition that he eventually loses. Although Henchard loses even the ability to explain himself—“he did not sufficiently value himself to lessen his sufferings by strenuous appeal or elaborate argument”—he never relinquishes his talent of endurance. Whatever the pain, Henchard bears it. It is this resilience that elevates him to the level of a hero—a man, ironically, whose name deserves to be remembered.
As the novel’s protagonist, Henchard is the “Man of Character” to whom the subtitle of The Mayor of Casterbridge alludes. When the novel opens, Henchard is a disconsolate twenty-one-year-old hay-trusser who, in a drunken rage, sells his wife and daughter at a county fair. Eighteen years later, Henchard has risen to become the mayor and the most accomplished corn merchant in the town of Casterbridge. Although he tries to atone for his youthful crimes, he focuses too much on his past misdeeds and enters a downward trajectory that embroils him in a fierce competition with a popular Scotchman named Donald Farfrae.
Michael Henchard is a strong man with great energy. He has fine points in his character, but they are contrasted sharply with other less admirable qualities. Thus, he will try to make up for what he has done to Susan, but he will still remain rash and impetuous in his dealings with people. He is honest and upright, so much so that he insists on binding one of his arms when fighting Farfrae, and he refuses to hide one cent of his property from the administrators of his bankrupt business. Even the administrators praise his honesty. He is generous and kind to Abel Whittle's mother. Donald Farfrae owes much to Henchard's giving him a start. These are but a few instances of Henchard's honesty and generosity.
But the darker side of Henchard's character is even more evident. He has no compunction in punishing Abel Whittle too severely for lateness, and the quality of his kindness and friendship to Farfrae becomes overbearing and possessive. His pride is noteworthy, but often it grows into hideous egoism. Thus, his pride refuses to let him reveal his past to Elizabeth-Jane, and at the end of the novel he cannot bring himself to tell her the true account of his lie to Newson. Again, it is his pride which prompts the rivalry and jealousy he feels toward Donald Farfrae. But, despite obvious flaws in his character, Henchard has the ability to love deeply. He achieves the strength to take silently upon himself the suffering caused by his own sins, and it is this will to endure the wrath of the heavens that gives him great stature.
In the novel, The Mayor of Casterbridge, Hardy presents Michael Henchard as ‘a man of character’ while throughout the novel Henchard commits a number of blunders. Hardy puts two characters in front of us– Michael Henchard and Donald Farfrae. By using this technique of showing the actions of his characters, Hardy proves that even an uneducated man may be a man of character. He draws a line between ‘education and qualification’, and instead of introducing his main character by his name, he gives a detailed description of Michael Henchard’s personality to show that it is the personality of Henchard that matters more than the name he has. Hardy tries to prove that a lot of the bad stuff that happens to Henchard is a result of his natural personality, which he really cannot change. That is a convincing way of Hardy to introduce the main character of his novel. Moreover, it goes along with the novel’s title because the novel is not named Michael Henchard but The Mayor of Casterbridge: The Life and Death of a Man of Character. Throughout the novel Hardy tries to have a balance in Henchard’s character because Henchard is something between ‘a Man’ and ‘a Mayor’.
The Mayor of Casterbridge is a tragic novel by British novelist Thomas Hardy and is one of Hardy's Wessex Novels. He has an elusive task in The Mayor of Casterbridge. The main character of this novel Michael Henchard has more personality flaws than the average novel's hero and commits a number of blunders, and yet the author wants us to feel sorrow for him when things go against him. 
This is the method Hardy uses to open the novel and introduces the main character of his novel without providing him a name. Hardy first introduces the personality and then names him so that the personality of Michael Henchard may enter into our minds and from the very beginning, we may start our analysis on his character and think why Hardy calls him (Henchard) ‘a man of character’. 
It is right that he does a number of blunders unintentionally but whenever he realizes he has done wrong, he is ready for punishment
On one hand, Henchard's quick temper is obviously a major flaw. It is the reason that he sold his wife, lost his friendship with Farfrae, and sent Elizabeth-Jane away. On the other hand, at least his temper is easy to see. He is not like Lucetta who hides what she is feeling and disguises her true self with fancy clothes and makeup. Henchard might have a terrible temper and too little selfcontrol but at least he is honest about it. He realizes, for example, that all of his personal losses are at least partly his own fault: Susan, Farfrae, Lucetta, Elizabeth-all had gone from him, one after one, either by his fault or by his misfortune (Hardy, 1902). And that might be one answer to how Hardy manages to make the reader care about a guy as deeply flawed as Henchard: for all his faults, he is at least honest with himself and others. His defects seem to be so deeply ingrained in his personality that he could not change them even if he wanted to. When he screws up and things go badly for him, he eventually recognizes that it is his own fault, even if he blames everyone around him at first.
And to counterbalance that terrible temper of his, Henchard is also very fair-minded. If we think about the scene in which he challenges Donald Farfrae to a fight to death. Henchard is a lot taller and stronger than Farfrae so he fights him with one hand tied behind his back to even things out. When he has to declare bankruptcy, he is completely honest and open with the bankers and does not hold back a single dime. When he swears the oath to avoid alcohol for twenty-one years, he keeps it to the very day, in spite of all the temptations to break it. Thomas Hardy wants the readers to have pity on Michael Henchard. Hardy clears that obviously Henchard is responsible for his tragedy but all the blunders that have been committed by him were not intentional. They all were the results of his circumstances. What was important for Hardy was the sign of relation between people and their environment so that an object or mark ‘raised or made by man on a scene is worth ten times any such formed by unconscious nature
He (Michael Henchard) realizes all his flaws and punishes himself accordingly. He is not a well- educated scholar as Donald Farfrae but he never fears and accepts all the blunders of his life. In the very beginning of the novel, Hardy presents a detailed description of Michael Henchard without providing him a name so at the end of the novel he may justify the title of the novel, The Mayor Of Casterbridge: The Life And Death of a Man of Character and proves the main character of his novel, who is an uneducated guy and does not have a good background, Michael Henchard, ‘a man of character’.
Henchard is the central character in Thomas Hardy’s The Mayor of Casterbridge. Hardy’s novel records his tragic personality and complicated life. Henchard rises from hay trussing to become the Mayor of Casterbridge which is a fictional town in Britain. Hardy was a determinist in his own view, who believed in forces outside human control that shaped human life. He believed that all in a man’s life was not under his own control but that external forces could have a tragic impact on it. In the Mayor of Casterbridge, Henchard’s character appears true to this philosophy. His rise and fall are evidence of the power that rests in the hands of fate.
Thomas Hardy presents Henchard as a man of character who has accumulated too many pressures in his life. He succumbs to these pressures and dies a low death at the end. Call it poverty or Henchard’s poor fate, he ends up ruining his life badly. Hardy has highlighted certain weaknesses in his character including his odd temper which can cause obstruct judgment and lead to wrong decisions. Henchard is a complex character and difficult t manage for people close to him. He also defies being understood beyond an extent but he is ambitious and caught in a conflict between his personal emotions and his ambition. He has abandoned his family or rather his family has abandoned him. Hardy connects things like fate and sin with Henchard’s life to show that despite being strong, man is subject to natural forces. In this way, he has added depth to Henchard’s character and made him an object of readers’ sympathy. Hardy’s excellence lies in the fact that he has turned someone who has committed the abominable sin of having sold his wife, a hero worthy of sympathy. At least Henchard remains so during a large part of the novel.
Henchard has remained an honest and reliable leader for the people of Casterbridge. However, the picture is not as bright in his personal life which is a dark mess full of tragic episodes. Hardy shows with clarity that Henchard trying to escape one mess lands himself in another. His poor fate follows him everywhere like a shadow. By the end, all the love and hope in his life is gone and he is lying dead in a pit. Fate has punished him for his sins which seems a little unfair given the man had tried a lot to reform. The pit in which he lies dead signifies a circle of hell to which Henchard’s soul has been banished forever. It may appear that life has punished him excessively but then for Henchard, it has always been difficult to balance his act.
Henchard’s relationship with Farfrae is just as ill-fated who becomes the cause of his doom. He hired Farfrae thinking he will bring life back to his business but he turns a competitor and his rise becomes Henchard’s ruin. Lucetta also dies because of her relationship with Henchard. She ends up dying a melodramatic death after her love letters are discovered. In her death, she proves that Henchard’s ill fate has affected the people around him.
Henchard’s death proves two things. First, a man should not lose sight of his weaknesses or he will ruin his own fate. The second thing it proves is that you can hide your weaknesses but to overcome them you need to make sacrifices. Henchard has kept hiding his past from people until Susan’s return. Susan is the punishment fate has imposed upon him. The vicious circle of fate ends only with Henchard’s reunion with Susan in the heavens. He has not died a peaceful death but then nothing could have brought peace to his life than death. He dies the most tragic death in the novel; even tragic than Lucetta. Hardy’s novel also shows the English society in a poor light which is habituated of intruding into other’s personal lives.
Is Henchard a tragic character? Why or why not? Does he possess a tragic flaw that leads to his downfall? If so, what is it?
In Thomas Hardy’s novel, The Mayor of Casterbridge, the main protagonist, Michael Henchard displays the typical traits of a tragic hero. He is presented with certain admirable qualities such as his overbearing generosity coupled with his staunch integrity. However, his tragic flaw, being his volatile and domineering personality completely governed by his emotions, his overwhelming pride, and his fierce temper begin to get the better of him. As a result, he suffers from his reversal of fortune. Plagued by his impulsive decisions, he quickly transitions from the mayor of Casterbridge and an owner of a prosperous industry, to a miserable wretch, despised by his fellow townsmen.


 
In the beginning, Henchard suffers from his drinking habit. This leads to a chain reaction which results in selling of his wife by auction. But his integrity and sense of responsibility leads him on a search to find his wife. His subsequent oath of abstaining from alchohol for twenty one years shows his moral standards. His sense of responsibility drives him to make up for his wrong-doings and mistakes. Furthermore, his staunch integrity is later shown when his wife, Susan, arrives in Casterbridge and he decides to remarry her to make amends for the mistake committed.

Aside from that, his many instances of magnanimity is another one of his more amiable traits. Henchard recruits Farfrae without having any background knowledge on him, he allows Farfrae to not only name his own conditions but have a say in his pay as well. As the novel progresses, Henchard’s lavish generosity becomes more conspicuous. He also willingly takes care of Whittle’s mother, preventing her from freezing through the winter.

Henchard’s notoriety comes from his domineering and impulsive temperament. From the beginning of his life, to his bitter end, he demonstrates many instances of this flaw. In the beginning, Henchard, as a result of his emotions, ends up selling his wife. Afterwards, Henchard ends up firing Farfrae due to increasing jealousy. His impulsiveness causes him to compete with Farfrae. Henchard, wanting to dominate others, feels inferior to Farfrae. As a result, he attempts to regain fame by hosting an event that is greater than that of Farfrae’s. This impulsive decision results in disaster as it rains, ruining Henchard’s fair, and popularizing Farfrae’s. This shows how Henchard’s vehemence alongside his tyrannical behavior, causes him to make irrational decisions. He fires his best manager and only friend, despite being inept at managing his business himself.

On the days that followed, Henchard instinctually launches an economic war against Farfrae, causing destruction of his business. He fires Jopp at once in the heat of anger, and shifts the blame to him instead of on himself. His temper overrides all rational thought and in turn, begin to lead him toward his downfall; his reversal of fortune.

As his tragic flaws completely overtake him, he commits deeds which are at the root of his own downfall; his “fall from grace.” His old drinking habits reappear as twenty one years have passed. He is shortly after removed from the position of mayor by Farfrae, which causes him great humiliation. Henchard acts upon his impulses and attempts to kill Farfrae. This scenario aids in Henchard’s ruin as it causes Farfrae, the only person he has ever considered a friend, to completely despise him. He lies to Newson about Elizabeth’s status. His attitude and treatment towards Elizabeth-Jane is equally impulsive and rash. Initially, he was over-protective, but as soon as he learns that she is Newson’s biological daughter, he starts neglecting her and almost compels her to leave him. It is from this, that he ensures his descent. His deception causes him to become a vagabond until his inevitable death.

From the beginning, to his end, Henchard’s collapse was to a great extent due to his own actions. However, fate, as well as chances and coincidences, plays an equally important role in his destiny and makes him a clear example of a tragic hero
The Relation between Character and Fate in The Mayor of Casterbridge
In The Mayor of Casterbridge there are two very strong forces working – sometimes together, sometimes regardless of each other. On the one hand this is predestination, defined by the characters own feature which are peculiar to each character; on the other hand this is chance which is external for the character and is shared by all of them.


 
Unlike in Hardy’s other novels, characters play a far greater role than Fate in The Mayor of Casterbridge in bringing about Henchard's tragedy. Henchard's misfortunes result from his own deeds and actions. Though Fate plays an important role in the story, Henchard's character plays a much greater role. When the story opens, the reader sees that Henchard is a poor, ambitious, rash, and impulsive young man, who, in a drunken state, sells his wife and child. His past catches up with him more than twenty years later, in the shape of the 'furmity woman' who accelerates his downfall. Thus, the reader witnesses an example of how Henchard's own actions are responsible for his misfortune.

Henchard's pride cannot accept the fact that Farfrae has become more popular and successful than he. As a result, he completely breaks off his relationship with Farfrae and does not allow the courtship between Farfrae and Elizabeth-Jane to progress. Had he been less impulsive and more reasonable, Henchard would have continued to prosper because Farfrae was never against him, not viewing Henchard as a rival. But Henchard does everything possible to get the best of Farfrae, challenging him to a wrestling match and contemplating murdering the successful, young man. Fate intervenes, however, to make Henchard come to his senses.

Henchard does not treat Elizabeth-Jane much better than he treats Farfrae. When he learns that Elizabeth-Jane is not his biological daughter, he becomes very cold towards her, making her want to move out of his house and leave him isolated and lonely. When he realizes how much he loves and misses her, fate again comes into play, for she has learned about his lie to Newson and wants nothing to do with him. He tries to reconcile with her on her wedding day, even taking her a caged goldfinch for a wedding present. Unfortunately, he leaves it outside and does not retrieve it when Elizabeth-Jane states she wants nothing to do with her stepfather. Then fate again kicks into control. Elizabeth-Jane finds the goldfinch and realizes it was a token of her father's repentance; but it is too late for the goldfinch and Henchard, for both have died.

Nature plays a fateful role in The Mayor of Casterbridge as the fluctuations of weather are witnessed twice in the novel. Once, the rain ruins Henchard preparations for a grand entertainment, which furthers Henchard's jealousy for Farfrae who has prepared for rain; another time, Henchard speculates heavily on the weather and loses. As a result, Henchard faces bankruptcy.

Fate, in the guise of coincidence, has a great impact on Henchard's fortunes. Had Susan not returned, Henchard might have married Lucetta and lived peacefully for the rest of his life. Similarly, just when Henchard reveals his paternity to Elizabeth- Jane, he finds Susan's unsealed letter and makes the discovery that she is, in fact, Newson's daughter. It is by coincidence that he finds the letter, and it is also coincidence that he is tempted to read the letter because it is unsealed.When Henchard finally accepts Elizabeth-Jane, he becomes dependent on her for love. Fate intervenes again, and Newson appears on the scene. The meeting between Farfrae and Lucetta is also the result of a coincidence, for she just happens to be alone and available for conversation.

Although the reader sees the arbitrary and pernicious workings of Fate upon the destinies of man, Hardy also implies that Henchard and Lucetta are responsible for their own destinies. It is both blind fate and juxtaposition of characters that are at work here as major devices of forming the development of the plot.
The Mayor of Casterbridge as a Novel of Series of Chances and Coincidences
In Hardy's novel chance and coincidence play very vital and dominating role in determining the destiny of the character. In his novel The Mayor of Casterbridge too, there are a series of chances and coincidences throughout the whole plot structure. He is guided by his fate in every step of his life. Selling his wife and daughter in his drunkenness, taking them by Richard Newson, successive establishment of Farfrae, Susan's death, naming the newly born child of Susan and Newson as Elizabeth-Jane, Henchard's failure in business, getting Susan and Elizabeth-Jane at Casterbridge, becoming the mayor of Casterbridge from a hay-trusser, coming to know the child as the sailor's daughter - all events of the novel are guided by the chances and coincidences.


 
It is a kind of coincidence that he drinks at Weydon-Priors and in his drunkenness, he sells his wife and daughter. This is very first and crucial coincidence which cause further ups and down in his whole life. The arrival of the person who is ready to buy the wife and child of Henchard has also been presented in a very coincidental manner.

Susan's return to Henchard after a period of eighteen years is a pure chance for Henchard. Her arrival coincides with Henchard's decision to marry Lucetta. The unexpected return of Susan upsets all Henchard's calculations and brings a series of misfortunes to him.

Henchard's effort to win Elizabeth-Jane's filial love almost coincides with his discovery that she is not his own daughter. Had not Henchard found Susan's letter, or if that letter had been properly sealed, he would have lived happily with Elizabeth-Jane, at least till her wedding-day.

It is a pure accident that Elizabeth-Jane and Lucetta meet for the first time in the churchyard. This accidental meeting leads to several complications afterwards. Lucetta engages Elizabeth-Jane as a companion, her motive being partly to attract Henchard to her house. Henchard on his part is now ready to marry Lucetta. But fate intervenes. Farfrae pays a visit to Lucetta's house in order to meet Elizabeth-Jane whom he wants to court with the object of marriage. It so happens that Elizabeth-Jane is at that particular moment not in the house, and Farfrae meets Lucetta just by chance. Lucetta has been expecting Henchard to visit her, but Farfrae turns up there instead. Far-reaching are the consequences of this coincidence. Lucetta would now like to marry Farfrae, not Henchard. Farfrae would like to marry Lucetta, not Elizabeth-Jane. Henchard who has lost Susan, Farfrae, and even Elizabeth-Jane, will now lose Lucetta also. Evidently fate is hostile to Henchard, and has played a trick upon him by sending Farfrae to Lucetta's house just when Elizabeth-Jane is away.

The appearance of the old furmity woman in Casterbridge is another accident. It was absolutely unforeseen that the furmity woman would one day disclose the secret of Henchard's early life. And, yet, perhaps the disclosure would not have come if the furmity woman had not been produced before Henchard for trial. The disclosure of Henchard's secret of his early life affects Henchard's reputation badly.

Newson's arrival in Casterbridge to claim his daughter Elizabeth-Jane is another unforeseen and accidental occurrence. It was the news of Newson's death that had made it possible and even necessary for Susan to return to Henchard. But Newson comes to claim his daughter just when Elizabeth-Jane is the only source of comfort that Henchard has got - in every other respect he is a ruined man. Newson's arrival in the town almost coincides with Henchard's new emotional attitude towards Elizabeth-Jane.

In this way there are so many coincidental events in the novel that plays vital role in the holistic plot development of the novel. Henchard has become the puppet of his own destiny. Everything goes beyond the control of Henchard during the whole life journey of Henchard. Henchard has been depicted as a helpless protagonist in the hands of chances and coincidences. All these coincidental forces have come from the outside world rather than the characters' own intentional commitment. Henchard always tried to maintain his power, prestige, glory and dignity, but after all he faced only the tragic end of his life. No doubt Henchard plays his part in his ruin, but the determining factor of the destiny of the character in Hardy's novel is only chances and coincidences.

